# Tree-decline-impacts-on-fauna-abundance
Database and R script for phylogenetic correction meata-analysis
Significant portions of the globe’s forests have been impacted by severe and large-scale tree declines characterised by gradual but widespread loss of vigour and subsequent death of either single or several tree species. Tree deaths represents a significant threat for fauna that are dependent on forest habitats for their survival, and although tree declines have received considerable scientific attention, surprisingly little is known about their impacts on fauna. In total we calculated 632 effect sizes across 59 studies that quantified the impact of tree declines on animal abundance responses to tree declines. 
Data representing 186 bird species indicated an overall increase in bird abundance in response to tree declines (meta-analysis mean estimation g = 0.1716 ± 0.0526, p=0.0011); however there was substantial variability in responses (significant heterogeneity p < 0.001) with a strong influence of diet as well as nesting guild on bird responses. Granivores (especially ground-foraging species, e.g. Passerellidae species), bark-foraging insectivores (e.g. woodpeckers), ground- and cavity-nesting species apparently benefitted from tree declines, while aerially-foraging insectivores (e.g. flycatchers), nectarivores and leaf-gleaning (canopy-feeding) birds were less common in the presence of tree declines. 
Data representing 33 mammal species indicated detrimental effects of tree declines on mammals that use trees as refuge, while some bat species apparently benefit from opening-up of the canopy. Overall the average effect for mammals was neutral (meta-analysis mean estimation g = -0.1495 ± 0.1458, p=0.3021). 
Data representing 20 reptile species showed insufficient range of responses to determine any effect of diet or foraging guild on their responses. 
Data for 28 arthropod taxa should be considered with caution, as we could not adequately separate taxa according to their specialisations and reliance on key habitat. The data broadly suggest a detrimental effect of tree declines (meta-analysis mean estimation g = -0.1708 ± 0.0715, p=0.0168) with ground-foraging arthropods (e.g. detritovores and predators such as spiders and centipedes) more likely to be detrimentally impacted by tree declines. 
The range of responses to tree declines signifies substantially altered animal communities. In many instances, altered ecosystem function due to loss of key animal services will represent a significant threat to forest health.
